# Class Anatomy: Attributes and Methods

Let's create our own `class` and `object` with `attributes` and `methods`

## Basic class

To start a new class definition, all we need is class statement, followed by the name of the class,
followed by a colon.

```{thebe-button} 
```

````{container} thebe
```{code-block} 
:class: thebe, thebe-init 
class Customer:
    #  code inside `class` is indented
    pass    # use pass to create an "empty" class
```
````

Even though the above class `Customer` is empty, we can already create objects of the class by 
telling the name of the class, followed by parentheses.


```{thebe-button} 
```

````{container} thebe
```{code-block}
:class: thebe, thebe-init 

customer1 = Customer()
customer2 = Customer()
```
````


`customer 1` and `customer 2` are two different objects of the empty class Customer.

## Adding Methods to a Class

How do we define methods? By creating functions inside the class. 

```{important}
There is one exception! The special `self` argument needs to be created as the first argument for every method, possibly
followed by other arguments. 
```

Let's create a `method` called `identify` for the `Customer` class that takes `self` and `name` as parameters, and
finally print a message, when called.

```{thebe-button} 
```

````{container} thebe
```{code-block}
:class: thebe, thebe-init 

class Customer:

    def identify(self,name):
        print(" Hi, I am Customer " + name)
```
````


Now, let's create a new customer object, and call the method `identify` by using object-dot-method syntax and pass the
desired name, to finally get the output.

```{thebe-button} 
```

````{container} thebe
```{code-block}
:class: thebe 

customer1 = Customer()
customer1.identify("Fernando C. Pacheco")
```
``` {container} output
`Hi, I am Customer Fernando C. Pacheco`
```
````

## What is `self`?

Classes are templates. Objects of a class don't yet exist when a class is being defined, but we often
need a way to refer to the data of a particular object within class definition. 

The purpose of `self` is to serve as a stand-in for the future object. 

Python takes care of `self` when `methods` are called from an object:

```python
customer1.identify("Fernando")
``` 
The above will be interpreted as: 

```python
Customer.identify(customer1, "Fernando")
```

## Add Attributes to Class

Customer name should be an attribute of a customer object, instead of a parameter passed to a method.


```{thebe-button} 
```

````{container} thebe
```{code-block}
:class: thebe, thebe-init 

class Customer:
    # Set the `name` attribute of an object to `new_name`
    def set_name(self,new_name):
        # Create an attribute by assigning a value
        self.name = new_name      # this will create `.name` when set_name is called
    
    def identify(self):
        print(" Hi, I am Customer " + self.name)


customer1 = Customer()
customer1.set_name("Fernando")      # <--- `.name` is created and set to "Fernando"

print(customer1.name)               # <--- `.name` can now be used =)

```
````

+ Let's compare the codes: 

    ::::{grid} 2
    :::{grid-item-card}  **Old Version**:
    :columns: 8
    ```python
    class Customer:
        
        
        
        
        def identify(self,name):
            print(" Hi, I am Customer " + name)
    ```
    :::
    :::{grid-item-card}  **New Version**:
    :columns: 8
    ```python
    class Customer:
        
        def set_name(self,new_name):
            self.name = new_name 
        
        # Use `.name` from the object it*self* 
        def identify(self):
            print(" Hi, I am Customer " + self.name)
    ```
    :::
    ::::

    We removed the name parameter from the identify method, and replaced it with self-dot-name in the
    printout, which uses self, to pull the name attribute from the object that called the method. 


    ```{thebe-button} 
    ```

    ````{container} thebe
    ```{code-block} 
    :class: thebe, thebe-init 
    customer1 = Customer()
    customer1.set_name("Fernando") 
    customer1.identify()
    ```
    ````

## The `__init__` constructor 

+ We have been defining and calling `methods` one after another. This could become unsustainable if 
our classes contain a lot of data. 

+ A better way to deal with that would be to add data to the object when creating it. Python allows us
to add a special method called the `constructor` --> `__init__()` that is automatically called every time 
an object is created.

    ```python
    class MyClass:
        def __init__(self,attr1,attr2,attr3):
            self.attr1 = attr1
            self.attr2 = attr2
            self.attr3 = attr3

    # All attributes are created at the same time
    obj = MyClass(value1, value2, value3)
    ```

+ Defining all attributes in the constructor ensures that all of them are created when the object is created,
so you don't have to worry about trying to access an attribute that doesn't yet exist. 

+ All this results in more organized, readable, and maintainable code.


## Best practices

1. Initialize attributes in `__init__()`
2. Naming:
   1. ***Classes***: `CamelCase`
      1. If your class name has several words, they should be written without delimiters.
      2. Each word should start with a capital letter.
      
   2. ***Functions & Attributes*** : `lower_snake_case`
      1. Words should be separated by underscores and start with lowercase letters.

3. Keep `self` `self`
4. Use `docstings`
   1. Classes allow you to create docstrings which are displayed when help() is called on the object.
      ```python
      class Myclass:
          """This class does nothing but has docstring =) """
          passs
      ```

### Example - Class constructor

```{thebe-button} 
```

````{container} thebe
```{code-block}
:class: thebe 
class Employee:
    """This is a docstring version for the `Employee` class."""
  
    # Create __init__() method
    def __init__(self, name, salary=0):
        # Create the name and salary attributes
        self.name = name
        self.salary = salary
    
    def give_raise(self, amount):
        self.salary += amount

emp = Employee("Fernando C. Pacheco")
print(emp.name)
print("Current salary: " + str(emp.salary))
emp.give_raise(1500)
print("Current salary: " + str(emp.salary))
emp.give_raise(3000)
print("Current salary: " + str(emp.salary) + " LETSSSS GOOOOOOOO GIVE ME MORE ")
```
````




## Example - Class constructor  2

```{thebe-button} 
```

````{container} thebe
```{code-block}
:class: thebe 
import math


class Point:

    def __init__(self, x=0, y=0):
        self.x = x
        self.y = y

    # From the previous lesson
    def distance_to_origin(self):
        return math.sqrt(self.x ** 2 + self.y ** 2)

    def reflect(self, axis):
        if axis == "x":
            self.y = -self.y
        elif axis == "y":
            self.x = -self.x
        else:
            print("error")


pt = Point(x=3.0)
pt.reflect("y")
print((pt.x, pt.y))
pt.y = 4.0
print(pt.distance_to_origin())
   

```
````
 